## Chp 10 - Imperial Visions

### Empire

An empire is a political order with two important characteristics:
1. cultural diversity - rule over a significant number of cultures
2. territorial flexibility - can swallow and digest more and more nations/territories without altering their basic structure or identity

Contemporary critique of empires
1. Empires do not work. In the long run, it isn't possible to rule effectively over a large # of conquered people.
- False 
    - empire has been the world's most common form of political organization for the last 2,500 years, which proved to be a very stable form of government.
2. Empires are evil engines of destruction and exploitation. Every people should never be subject to the rule of another.
- Partially true 
    - Conquered people don't have a very good record of freeing themselves from their imperial overlords. 
		- In many cases, subjugated people where handed off from one empire to another. 
		- Empires used wars, enslavement, deportation, genocide to build and maintain order.
- Partially false
    - It doesn't mean that empires leave nothing of value in their wake. To color all empires black and to disavow all imperial legacies is to reject most of human culture because most humans have lived in empires for the last 2,500 years.
    - Imperial elites used the profits of conquest to finance not only armies but also philosophy, art, justice, charity
    - We find imperial legacies in the majority of modern culture (e.g. language - Spanish, Portuguese, French, English, Chinese). 

### Heaven and All Under Heaven

Around 550 BC, the imperial vision of Cyrus the Great of Persia to rule the whole world for the sake of all people was startling because, up till that point, Homo Sapiens thought in terms of ethnic exclusivity, dividing humanity into two parts: we and they. Cyrus, on the other hand, tended to be inclusive and all-encompassing by recognizing the basic unity of the entire world.

Similar imperial visions were developed in China. According to traditional Chinese political theory, Heaven (Tian) is the source of all legitimate authority on earth. Heaven chooses the most worthy person/family and gives them the Mandate of Heaven. This person rules over All Under Heaven (Tianxia) for the benefit of all its inhabitants.

This "benevolent" imperial vision passed on to Roman emperors, Muslim caliphs, Indian dynasts, and eventually to Soviet premiers and American presidents. It has justified the existence of empires, and negated attempts by subject people to rebel and independent people to resist imperial expansion.

### When They Become Us

Empires have played a decisive part in amalgamating many small cultures into fewer big cultures. Empires purposefully spread common ideas, institutions, customs and norms to:
1. make it easier to rule by standardizing fragmented cultures
2. gain legitimacy from conquered by providing "superior" culture 

The benefits were sometimes salient - law enforcement, urban planning, standardization of weights and measures - and sometimes questionable - taxes, conscription, emperor worship. But most imperial elites earnestly believed that they were working for the general welfare of all the empire's inhabitants.

The cultural ideas spread by empire were seldom the exclusive creation of the ruling elite. With a few exceptions, most empires have begot hybrid civilizations that absorbed much from their subject people. However, the process of assimilation for the subject people was painful and traumatic. 

### The Imperial Cycle
|Stage|European Imperialism|
|-|-|
|A small group establishes big empire|The Europeans establish the Europeans empires|
|An imperial culture is forged|Western culture|
|The imperial culture is adopted by the subject peoples|The subject peoples adopt English and French, socialism, nationalism, human rights, etc.|
|The subject peoples demand equal status in the name of common imperial values|Indians, Chinese and Africans demand equal status with Europeans in the name of common Western values such as nationalism, socialism, and human rights|
|The empire's founders lose their dominance|Europeans lose control of the global world, in favor of a multi-ethnic elite largely committed to Western values and ways of thinking|
|The imperial culture continues to flourish and develop|The Indians, Chinese, and Africans continue to develop their adopted Western culture|

### Good Guys and Bad Guys in History
It is tempting to divid history into good guys and bad guys, with all empires among the bad guys. Yet most of today's cultures are based on imperial legacies. If empires are by definition bad, what does that say about us?

There are schools of thought that seek to purge human culture of imperialism, leaving behind what they claim is a pure, authentic civilization, untainted by sin. These ideologies are at best naive; at worst they serve as disingenuous window-dressing for crude nationalism and bigotry. There has been no "pure" culture since the the dawn of recordred history.

Nobody knows how to solve this thorny question of cultural inheritance, but the first step is to acknowledge the complexity of the dilemma and to accept that simplistically dividing the past into good guys and bad guys leads nowhere.

### The New Global Empire
The global empire being forged before our eyes is not governed by any particular state or ethnic group. It is ruled by a multi-ethnic elite, and is held together by a common culture and common interests. Throughout the world, more and more entrepreneurs, engineers, experts, scholars, lawyers and managers are called to join the empire. They must ponder whether to answer the imperial call or to remain loyal to their state and their people. More and more choose the empire.


## Questions
Do you believe that the today's imperial elites are earnestly working for the general welfare of its inhabitants?
Is imperialism a necessary evil?


