## Chapter 9 - The Arrow of History
Myths and fictions accustomed people from the moment of birth to:
- think in certain ways
- behave in accordance with certain standards
- want certain things
- observe certain rules

It created a network of artificial instincts called `culture` that enabled millions of strangers to cooperate efficiently.
Regardless of its typical beliefs, norms, and values, culture is in constant flux.

**Every man-made order is packed with internal contradictions. Culture constantly tries to reconcile them.**
- Christianity vs. chivalry in medieval Europe
- equality vs. individual freedom in modern political order

### Equality vs. Individual Freedom
Equality can be ensured only by curtailing the freedoms of those who are better off. On the other hand, guaranteeing that every individual will be free to do as he wishes inevitably short-changes equality. The entire political history of the world since 1789 can be seen as a series of attempts to reconcile this contradiction.

In the US, 
- Democrats want a more equitable society even if it means raising taxes to fund programs to help the poor, elderly and infirm.
- Republicans want to maximize individual freedom, even if it means that the income gap between rich and poor will grow wider and that many Americans will not be able to afford health care.

Such contradictions are an inseparable part of every human culture (cognitive dissonance). **In fact, the discords in our thoughts, ideas, and values compel us to think, re-evaluate and criticize.**

### The Global Vision
Today we are used to thinking about the whole planet as a single unit, but for most of history, earth was in fact an entire galaxy of isolated human worlds. The number of humans worlds are decreasing over time.

10,000 BC - Thousands of human worlds existed
1450 AD - Most of Asia, Europe, and Africa were already connected by significant cultural, political, and economic ties
1800 AD - The remaining worlds - Mesoamerican, Andean, Australian, Oceanic - were subsequently conquered by Afro-Asian giants.

Today almost all humans share the same:
- geopolitical system - the entire planet is divided into internationally recognized states
- economic system - capitalism
- legal system - human rights and international law
- scientific system - physics

Homo sapiens evolved to think of people as divided into us (the group immediately around you) and them (everyone else), so the idea of universal order governing the entire world was alien to humans. In fact, no social animal is ever guided by the interests of the entire species to which it belongs. No chimpanzee cares about the interests of the chimpanee species. 

But beginning with the Cognitive Revolution, Homo Sapiens began to cooperate on a regular basis with compelte strangers. **Then the first millennium BC witnessed the appearance of three potentially universal orders, whose devotees could for the first time imagine the entire world and the entire human race as a single unit governed by a single set of laws.**
1. the monetary (economic) order
2. the imperial (political) order
3. the religious order

Merchants, conquerors, and prophets were the first people who managed to transcend the binary evolutionary division, 'us vs. them', and to foresee the potential unity of humankind. 
- For the merchants, the entire world was a single market and all humans were potential customers. 
- For the conquerors, the entire world was a single empire and all humans were potential subjects. 
- For the prophets, the entire world held a single truth and all humans were potential believers.

## Chapter 10 - The Scent of Money
### Economy of Favors and Obligations
Hunter-gatherers had no money. Each band hunted, gathered and manufactured almost everything it required. Different members may have specialized in different tasks, but they shared their goods nad services through an economy of favors and obligations. Little of this changed with the onset of the Agricultural Revolution.

However, an economy of favors and obligations doesn't work when large numbers of strangers try to cooperate. 

### The Rise and Fall of Barter Economy
The rise of cities/kingdoms and the improvement in transportation, however, brought about new opportunities for specialization. **But specialization created a problem - how do you manage the exchange of goods between the specialists?**

Barter doesn't work because it is only effective when exchanging a limited range of products or else you will have to learn anew the relative prices of dozens of commodities everyday. It cannot form the basis of a complex economy.

Soviet Union tried to solve the problem by establishing a **central barter system** that collected products from specialist manufacturers and distributed them to those who needed them. 'Everyone would work according to their abilities, and receive according to their needs' turned out in practice into 'everyone would work as little as they can get away with, and receive as much as they could grab'. 

Most societies found a more easy way to connect large numbers of experts - they developed **money**.

### Money

**Creation of money was a purely mental revolution.** It involved the creation of a new inter-subjective reality that exists solely in people's shared imagination. Money is anything that people are willing to use in order to represent systematically the value of other things for the purpose of exchanging goods and services.

Money enables people to:
1. compare quickly and easily the value of different commodities (unit of account)
2. easily exchange one thing for another (medium of exchange)
3. store wealth conveniently (store of value)

e.g. shells, cattle, skins, salt, grain, beads, cloth, coins, promissory notes, cigarettes

The sum total of money in the world today is about $60 trillion (book published in 2014). Yet, more than 90% exists only on computer servers. Most business transactions are executed by moving electronic data. As long as people are willing to trade goods and services in exchange for electronic data, it is superior to physical money. It is lighter, less bulky, and easier to keep track of.

For complex commercial systems to function, some kind of money is indispensable. It is a universal medium of exchange that enables people to convert almost everything into almost anything else. **It works because everyone always wants money.** Because money can convert, store, and transport wealth easily and cheaply, it made a vital contribution to the appearance of complex commercial networks and dynamic markets.

### How Does Money Work?
Dollars have value only in our common imagination. Their worth is not inherent in the chemical structure of the paper. **Money isn't a material reality - it is a psychological construct.** 

But why does it succeed? Why should anyone be willing to exchange goods for a piece of paper? 
- People are willing to do such thigns when they trust the figments of their collective imagination. 
- **Trust is the raw material from which all types of money are minted** 🤯 

Money is the most universal and most efficient system of mutual trust ever devised. Money is the only trust system that can bridge almost any cultural gap, and that does not discriminate on the basis of religion, gender, race, age or sexual orientation.

### Evolution of Money
1. When the first versions of money were created, people didn't have this sort of trust, so it was necessary to define as 'money' things that had intrinsic value. e.g. Sumerian barley money (history's first known money).
2. The real breakthrough in monetory history occurred when people gained trust in money that lacked inherent value, but was easier to store and transport. Such money was the silver shekel in ancient Mesopotamia. It had no inherent value; its value is purley cultural.

### Silver Shekel
The coin was imprinted with an identification mark which:
1. indicated how much precious metal the coin contained
2. identified the authority that issued the coin and that guaranteed its content 

That is why counterfeiting money has always been considered a much more serious crime. **Counterfeiting is a breach of sovereignty, an act of subversion against the power, privileges and person of the king.** As long as people trusted the power and integrity of the king, they trusted his coins. In turn, the power of the emperor also rested on the coins. It allowed the emperor to maintain the Roman Empire in order.

### Gold
Q: Why should Chinese, Indians, Muslisms and Spaniards - who belonged to very different cultures that failed to agree about much of anything - nevertheless share the belief in gold? Why didn't it happen that Spaniards believe in gold, while Muslims believed in barley, Indians in cowry shells, and Chinese in rolls of silk?

A: Once trade connects two areas, the forces of supply and demand tend to equalize the prices of transportable goods. When a good is valued higher in one place than the other, there is an arbitrage opportunity which balances the price out over time. The mere fact that people believe in gold in one region would cause others to start believing in it as well.

### The Price of Money
Money is based on two universal principles:
1. Universal convertibility - you can buy anything with money
2. Universal trust - any two people can cooperate with money as a go-between

Pros: money has enabled millions of strangers to cooperate effectively in trade and industry

Cons: it corrodes local traditions, intimate relations and human values, replacing them with the cold laws of supply and demand

**Although money builds universal trust between strangers, this trust is invested not in humans, but in money itself.** We do not trust the stranger - we trust the money they hold. If they run out of money, we run out of trust. People rely on money to facilitate cooperation with strangers, but they're afraid it will corrupt human values and intimate relations. Money is a double-edged sword.


## Questions
1. Is it possible to achieve both equality and individual freedom at the same time?
    1. What other internal contradictions have you experienced lately?

2. Europeans at one point must have thought of the Americas as we think of Mars today. How far do you think the human species will expand in this universe?
    1.Are we just inside another human world waiting to be unified with other worlds out in space?

3. What does money mean to you?

4. Authorities rely on money they issue to control its people/territory. Do governments have a vested interest in keeping cryptocurrency out of our hands?
    1. What are your thoughts on the future of cryptocurrency?
